Tutorials (#221)
applied-material-modeling/neml2: doc/tutorials/tensors/tensor_types/main.md

@insert-title:tutorials-tensors-tensor-types

[TOC]

NEML2 tensors are extremely similar to the tensor type provided by its default backend ATen. In fact, all NEML2 tensors inherit from `at::Tensor`, *the* tensor type from ATen. What's different from ATen is that the NEML2 tensor library provides the following enhancements:

> - Explicit distinction between *batch* and base dimensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Explicit distinction between *batch* and *base* dimensions
```

\f]
where \f$d_i\f$ is the number of components along dimension \f$i\f$.

In NEML2, we explicitly introduce the concept of batching such that the shape of a \f$n\f$-dimensional tensor may now be denoted (with a slight abuse of notation) as
\f{align*}
  (c_0, c_1, c_2, ..., c_i, ..., c_{n_b-2}, c_{n_b-1}\textcolor{blue}{;} d_0, d_1, d_2, ..., d_j, ..., d_{n-n_b-2}, d_{n-n_b-1}), \\
  i = 0, 1, 2, ..., n_b-1, \\
  j = 0, 1, 2, ..., n-n_b-1,
\f}
where \f$n_b \in [0, n]\f$ is the number of batch dimensions, \f$c_i\f$ is the number of components along each batch dimension, and \f$d_j\f$ is the number of components along each base dimension. In NEML2's notation, a separator \f$;\f$ is used to delimit batch and base sizes. Every batched tensor must have one and only one \f$;\f$ delimiter.

For example, given a tensor of shape
\f[
  (3, 100, 5, 13, 2),
\f]
we could assign it a batch dimension of 3, and the resulting shape of the batched tensor becomes
\f[
  (3, 100, 5; 13, 2).
\f]
Similarly, if the batch dimension is 0 or 5, the resulting shape would become
\f{align*}
  (; 3, 100, 5, 13, 2), \\
  (3, 100, 5, 13, 2;).
\f}

> It is valid for the \f$;\f$ delimiter to appear at the beginning or the end of the shape tuple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is valid for the \f$;\f$ delimiter to appear at the beginning or the end of the shape tuple.  If it appears at the beginning it means that tensor has no batch dimensions.  If it appears at the end it means the tensor is a batched scalar.
```

I can't remember is the last statement true?

## Why batching?

> The definition of batching is fairly straightforward yet arbitrary. A fair question to ask is "why another layer of abstraction on top of the regular tensor shape definition"? While it is difficult to give a thorough list of technical reasons at this point of the tutorial, let us briefly cover the high-level motivation behind this design choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The definition of batching is fairly straightforward. However, fair question to ask is "why another layer of abstraction on top of the regular tensor shape definition"? Let's briefly consider the high-level motivation behind this design choice.
```

- a fourth order tensor with batch shape \f$ (55, 100) \f$.

Such ambiguity can be avoided if the user consistently keeps track of batching throughout the lifetime of all related tensor operations, which is manageable in simple models but difficult to scale if the model grows in complexity. Therefore, in NEML2, we incorporate the management and propagation of this information directly in the tensor library, removing such overhead from user implementation.

**Scalar broadcasting**: With more details to be covered in a [later tutorial](#tutorials-tensors-broadcasting) on broadcasting, explicit batching allows general broadcasting rules between scalar and other primitive tensor types.

**Shape generalization**: As mentioned in the [tutorial](#tutorials-models-just-in-time-compilation) on JIT compilation, NEML2 supports tracing tensor operations into graphs. The PyTorch tracing engine does not support tracing operations on tensor shapes, and so users are left with two options:
- Trace the graph with example input variables having the same shape as real input variables to be used later on.
- Re-trace the graph whenever any input variable has a different shape.

> The first option implies a potential memory bound at the stage of JIT compilation, and is difficult to guarantee in practice. The second option imposes a significant runtime overhead whenever re-tracing is deemed necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first option implies a potential memory bound at the stage of JIT compilation, and is difficult to guarantee in practice. The second option imposes a significant runtime overhead whenever re-tracing is necessary.
```

| [WSR4](#neml2::WSR4)               | \f$(3,6)\f$             | Rank-4 tensor with skew symmetry then minor symmetry             |
| [WWR4](#neml2::WWR4)               | \f$(3,3)\f$             | Rank-4 tensor with skew symmetry                                 |
| [R5](#neml2::R5)                   | \f$(3,3,3,3,3)\f$       | Rank-5 tensor                                                    |
| [SSFR5](#neml2::SSFR5)             | \f$(6,6,3)\f$           | Rank-5 tensor with minor symmetry on base dimensions 0-3         |
| [R8](#neml2::R8)                   | \f$(3,3,3,3,3,3,3,3)\f$ | Rank-8 tensor                                                    |
| [SSSSR8](#neml2::SSSSR8)           | \f$(6,6,6,6)\f$         | Rank-8 tensor with minor symmetry                                |
| [Rot](#neml2::Rot)                 | \f$(3)\f$               | Rotation tensor represented in the Rodrigues form                |
| [Quaternion](#neml2::Quaternion)   | \f$(4)\f$               | Quaternion                                                       |
| [MillerIndex](#neml2::MillerIndex) | \f$(3)\f$               | Crystal direction or lattice plane represented as Miller indices |

> Furthermore, all primitive tensor types can be declared as variables, parameters, and buffers in a model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All primitive tensor types can be declared as variables, parameters, and buffers in a model.
```
